[vParquet3] docs (#2664)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/operations/dedicated_columns.md

---
title: Dedicated columns
description: Learn how to use dedicated columns to improve query performance.
weight: 42
---

# Dedicated columns

> 

Reviewer: Are we releasing Parquetv3 as experimental? If so, what do you think about adding this admonition to the doc? This is standard wording that we use for experimental features/procedures. 

```suggestion

{{% admonition type="warning" %}}
Dedicated columns is part of Parquetv3, an [experimental feature](/docs/release-life-cycle/). Engineering and on-call support is not available. Documentation is either limited or not provided outside of code comments. No SLA is provided.  
{{% /admonition %}}

```

Author: No, not really. It's the first iteration of making the schema more dynamic, but it's not experimental I'd say.

Reviewer: OKay. I can remove the suggestion to add the admonition.

> Dedicated columns are a way to improve query performance by storing the most frequently used columns in dedicated columns,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dedicated columns improve query performance by storing the most frequently used columns in dedicated columns,
```

Reviewer: Is this only for TraceQL queries or other queries?

Author: >Saying they improve query performance is more direct, but is it accurate for every case?

Good point. It either improves query performance or keeps it the same. IMO, how it's worded now it's accurate. TraceQL queries that use attributes are expected to always run better with dedicated columns.

>Is this only for TraceQL queries or other queries?

It affect TraceQL queries that use attributes in them—eg. `{span.storage.format = "vparquet3"}`. Queries that use intrinsics or special attributes are unaffected—eg. `{name = "foo"}`.

rather than in the generic attribute key-value list.

> This is a feature introduced with `vParquet3`, and is only available when using this Parquet storage format.
> To read more about the design of `vParquet3`, see [the design proposal](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/blob/main/docs/design-proposals/2023-05%20vParquet3.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Introduced with `vParquet3`, dedicated columns are only available when using this storage format.
To read more about the design of `vParquet3`, see [the design proposal](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/blob/main/docs/design-proposals/2023-05%20vParquet3.md).
```

## Configuration

Dedicated columns can be configured in the storage block or via overrides.

```yaml
# Storage configuration for traces
storage:
  trace:
    block:
      # Default dedicated columns for all blocks
      dedicated_columns:
        - name: <string>, # name of the attribute
          type: <string>, # type of the attribute. options: string
          scope: <string> # scope of the attribute. options: resource, span

overrides:
  # Global overrides for dedicated columns configuration
  dedicated_columns:
    - name: <string>, # name of the attribute
      type: <string>, # type of the attribute. options: string
      scope: <string> # scope of the attribute. options: resource, span

  per_tenant_override_config: /conf/overrides.yaml
---
# /conf/overrides.yaml
# Tenant-specific overrides configuration
overrides:
  "<tenant id>":
    dedicated_columns:
      - name: <string>, # name of the attribute
        type: <string>, # type of the attribute. options: string
        scope: <string> # scope of the attribute. options: resource, span

>   # A "wildcard" override can be used that will apply to all tenants if a match is not found otherwise.

Reviewer: "Otherwise" was redundant since you also say "if a match is not found".
```suggestion
  # A "wildcard" override can be used that will apply to all tenants if a match is not found.
```

  "*":
    dedicated_columns:
      - name: <string>, # name of the attribute
        type: <string>, # type of the attribute. options: string
        scope: <string> # scope of the attribute. options: resource, span
```

Priority is given to the most specific configuration, so tenant-specific overrides will take precedence over global overrides.
Similarly, default overrides take precedence over storage block configuration.

## Usage

Dedicated columns are limited to 10 span attributes and 10 resource attributes.
As a rule of thumb, good candidates for dedicated columns are attributes that contribute the most to the block size,
even if they are not frequently queried.
Reducing the generic attribute key-value list size significantly improves query performance.

### Tempo-cli

> In order to find good candidates for dedicated columns, the `tempo-cli` tool can be used.
> It provides the commands `analyse block <tenant-id> <block-id>` and `analyse blocks <tenant-id>` that will output the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use  the `tempo-cli` tool to find good candidates for dedicated columns.
The `tempo-cli` provides the commands `analyse block <tenant-id> <block-id>` and `analyse blocks <tenant-id>` that will output the
```

top N attributes by size for a given block or all blocks in a tenant.

> 

Author: Added!

---
title: Dedicated columns
description: Learn how to use dedicated columns to improve query performance.
weight: 42
---

# Dedicated columns

{{% admonition type="warning" %}}
Dedicated columns is part of Parquetv3, an [experimental feature](/docs/release-life-cycle/). Engineering and on-call support is not available. Documentation is either limited or not provided outside of code comments. No SLA is provided.  
{{% /admonition %}}

Dedicated columns improve query performance by storing the most frequently used columns in dedicated columns,
rather than in the generic attribute key-value list.

Introduced with `vParquet3`, dedicated columns are only available when using this storage format.
To read more about the design of `vParquet3`, see [the design proposal](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/blob/main/docs/design-proposals/2023-05%20vParquet3.md).

## Configuration

Dedicated columns can be configured in the storage block or via overrides.

```yaml
# Storage configuration for traces
storage:
  trace:
    block:

>       # Default dedicated columns for all blocks
>       dedicated_columns:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      version: vParquet3
      # Default dedicated columns for all blocks
      dedicated_columns:
```

overrides:
  # Global overrides for dedicated columns configuration
  dedicated_columns:
    - name: <string>, # name of the attribute
      type: <string>, # type of the attribute. options: string
      scope: <string> # scope of the attribute. options: resource, span

  per_tenant_override_config: /conf/overrides.yaml
---
# /conf/overrides.yaml
# Tenant-specific overrides configuration
overrides:
  "<tenant id>":
    dedicated_columns:
      - name: <string>, # name of the attribute
        type: <string>, # type of the attribute. options: string
        scope: <string> # scope of the attribute. options: resource, span

  # A "wildcard" override can be used that will apply to all tenants if a match is not found.
  "*":
    dedicated_columns:
      - name: <string>, # name of the attribute
        type: <string>, # type of the attribute. options: string
        scope: <string> # scope of the attribute. options: resource, span
```

Priority is given to the most specific configuration, so tenant-specific overrides will take precedence over global overrides.
Similarly, default overrides take precedence over storage block configuration.

## Usage

> Dedicated columns are limited to 10 span attributes and 10 resource attributes.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to emphasize that only strings are supported.
```suggestion
Dedicated columns are limited to 10 span attributes and 10 resource attributes with string values.
```
